# Conclusions [p. 9]

In this work, we introduced the BABILong, a diverse and scalable benchmark designed to bridge the gap in evaluating large language models (LLMs) across extensive context lengths. Our experiments demonstrate that BABILong offers a more representative evaluation framework for long-context reasoning among the existing benchmarks. The analysis of correlation with other benchmarks further validates BABILong's ability to pose a unique challenge for models to maintain performance as context lengths scale up. The BABILong benchmark offers algorithmically adaptable document length and facts placement, includes models from 0K to 10M tokens. Facts in BABILong could be generated making it leak-proof for future LLMs. It consists of a set of 20 diverse tasks covering reasoning tasks, including fact chaining, simple induction, deduction, counting, and handling lists/sets. Compared to other benchmarks, BABILong shows high correlation on short contexts with MMLU and diverges from it as lengths increases. [p. 9]

Our findings reveal limitations of current LLMs and GPT-4, Gemini 1.5 Pro and RAG solutions regarding effective long context utilization. Their performance heavily relies on the first 5-25% of the input, highlighting the need for improved context processing mechanisms. The recent open-source models LLama-3.1 and Qwen-2.5 show the best performance of pre-trained LLMs, with LLama-3.1 using pre-training and supervised fine-tuning on long context data up to 128K tokens. BABILong fine-tuning experiments show that tasks from BABILong are solvable even by relatively small models like RMT & ARMT with GPT-2 (137M) and Mamba (130M). Fine-tuning improves the performance of GPT-3.5-Turbo and Mistral-7B, but their context lengths remain limited to 16K and 32K, respectively. Among the evaluated models, Mamba and recurrent transformers achieve the strongest results. However, Mamba is hard to infer on lengths more than 128K tokens, while RMT and ARMT enables the processing of lengths up to 50 million tokens. [p. 9]
