# 7 Related work [p. 11]

**Language models** are probability distributions over sequences of words, tokens or characters (Shannon, 1948, 1951). This task, often framed as next token prediction, has long been considered a core problem in natural language processing (Bahl et al., 1983; Brown et al., 1990). Because Turing (1950) proposed to measure machine intelligence by using language through the "imitation game", language modeling has been proposed as a benchmark to measure progress toward artificial intelligence (Mahoney, 1999). [p. 11]

**Architecture.** Traditionally, language models were based on *n*-gram count statistics (Bahl et al., 1983), and various smoothing techniques were proposed to improve the estimation of rare events (Katz, 1987; Kneser and Ney, 1995). In the past two decades, neural networks have been successfully applied to the language modelling task, starting from feed forward models (Bengio et al., 2000), recurrent neural networks (Elman, 1990; Mikolov et al., 2010) and LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Graves, 2013). More recently, transformer networks, based on self-attention, have led to important improvements, especially for capturing long range dependencies (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2019). [p. 11]

**Scaling.** There is a long history of scaling for language models, for both the model and dataset sizes. Brants et al. (2007) showed the benefits of using language models trained on 2 trillion tokens, resulting in 300 billion *n*-grams, on the quality of machine translation. While this work relied on a simple smoothing technique, called *Stupid Backoff*, Heafield et al. (2013) later showed how to scale Kneser-Ney smoothing to Web-scale data. This allowed to train a 5-gram model on 975 billions tokens from CommonCrawl, resulting in a model with 500 billions *n*-grams (Buck et al., 2014). Chelba et al. (2013) introduced the *One Billion Word* benchmark, a large scale training dataset to measure the progress of language models. [p. 11]

In the context of neural language models, Jozefowicz et al. (2016) obtained state-of-the-art results on the Billion Word benchmark by scaling LSTMs to 1 billion parameters. Later, scaling transformers lead to improvement on many NLP tasks. Notable models include BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), Megatron-LM (Shoeybi et al., 2019), and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). A significant breakthrough was obtained with GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), a model with 175 billion parameters. This lead to a series of *Large Language Models*, such as Jurassic-1 (Lieber et al., 2021), Megatron-Turing NLG (Smith et al., 2022), Gopher (Rae et al., 2021), Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), OPT (Zhang et al., 2022), and GLM (Zeng et al., 2022). Hestness et al. (2017) and Rosenfeld et al. (2019) studied the impact of scaling on the performance of deep learning models, showing the existence of power laws between the model and dataset sizes and the performance of the system. Kaplan et al. (2020) derived power laws specifically for transformer based language models, which were later refined by Hoffmann et al. (2022), by adapting the learning rate schedule when scaling datasets. Finally, Wei et al. (2022) studied the effect of scaling on the abilities of large language models. [p. 11]
