# 6 Related Work [p. 10-11]

## 6.1 Long-Context Language Models [p. 10]

There is much prior work in designing performant language models with cheaper scaling than Transformers in the context length. Many lines of work pursue Transformer variants with attention modifications like recurrence (Dai et al., 2019), factorizing attention into computationally less intensive approximations (Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020), or low-rank approximations (Wang et al., 2020; Peng et al., 2021). Dao et al. (2022) instead provide a faster exact attention by a carefully-crafted IO-aware CUDA kernel. Separately, there are attempts to do away with attention entirely to remove quadratic sequence length complexity, often through convolution and/or linear RNNs, e.g., in RWKV (Peng, 2023), S4 (Gu et al., 2022), or Hyena (Poli et al., 2023). Many prior efforts evaluate perplexity on a diverse web corpus as a proxy for the ability to process long contexts; this work shows that precise knowledge access on long contexts may be an added challenge. [p. 10]

## 6.2 How Do Language Models Use Context? [p. 10-11]

The pioneering work of Khandelwal et al. (2018) showed that small LSTM language models make increasingly coarse use of longer-term context; Sankar et al. (2019) found similar results in dialogue models. In a similar vein, Daniluk et al. (2017) find that attentive LSTM language models tend to mainly use recent history. Petroni et al. (2020) were among the first to demonstrate the potential of combining context from an information retrieval system with a pretrained language models for unsupervised question answering. O'Connor and Andreas (2021) found that many information-destroying operations had marginal effects on Transformer LMs' predictions. Krishna et al. (2022) found that long-context neural generation in modestly-sized Transformer language models degenerates because models fail to properly condition on long context. Finally, studying long-context models, Sun et al. (2021) found that longer contexts improves prediction of only a few tokens, an empirical finding consistent with the theory of Sharan et al. (2018), who showed that sequence distributions with bounded mutual information necessarily lead to marginal *average* prediction benefits from increasingly long context. Qin et al. (2023) analyze how efficient Transformers perform on a variety of long-context downstream NLP tasks, finding that long-context transformers are recency-biased and do not effectively use long-range context. [p. 10-11]

## 6.3 The Serial-Position Effect [p. 11]

The U-shaped curve observed in this work has a connection in psychology known as the *serial-position effect* (Ebbinghaus, 1913; Murdock Jr, 1962), that states that in free-association recall of elements from a list, humans tend to best remember the first and last elements of the list. The serial-position effect plays a role in understanding how humans develop short- and long-term memory. Observing a serial-position-like effect in language models is perhaps surprising, since the self-attention mechanisms underlying Transformer language models is technically equally capable of retrieving any token from their contexts. [p. 11]
